content/en/patterns/content-management/tooltip.mdx, before:

---
description: "Provide additional context on hover or focus"
icon: MessageCircle
status: complete
---

import { BuildEffort } from "@app/_components/build-effort";

# Tooltip

**_(Also called hover hint, info bubble)_**

## Overview

A **tooltip** is a small popup that provides additional contextual information when a user hovers over, focuses on, or interacts with an element. It helps clarify elements with **icons, buttons, or text snippets** that may not be self-explanatory.

There are **two types of tooltips**:

- **Simple Tooltips** – Short text descriptions that appear on hover or focus, providing a brief explanation.
- **Rich Tooltips** – Enhanced tooltips that may contain **formatted text, icons, images, or interactive elements**.

Tooltips should be used to enhance understanding without overwhelming the user interface.

<BuildEffort
  level="low"
  description="Simple hover/focus effect. Requires ARIA attributes (`aria-describedby`) for accessibility but no complex state management."
/>

## Use Cases

### When to use:

Use a tooltip when you need to provide **additional context or explanations** without taking up extra space in the UI.

**Common use cases include:**

**Simple Tooltips**

- **Clarifying icons or abbreviations** (e.g., a settings cog, currency symbols).
- **Providing additional information** about form fields or table headers.
- **Showing helper text** for complex actions (e.g., "This action is permanent").
- **Explaining disabled elements** when a user cannot interact with them.
- **Providing keyboard shortcuts** when hovering over action buttons.

**Rich Tooltips**

- **Providing in-depth explanations** beyond a brief description.
- **Displaying small images, formatted text, or interactive content**.
- **Presenting additional details about data points in charts**.
- **Showing user profile previews in social apps**.

### When not to use:

- **For critical information** users must read, such as error messages.
- **For content that should remain visible**, like persistent hints or descriptions.
- **When users need to interact** with the tooltip itself.
- **If the tooltip is the only means** of conveying information (accessibility issue).
- **For mobile-first interactions** where hover-based behavior isn’t intuitive.

## Benefits

- **Reduces clutter** by providing contextual information without crowding the UI.
- **Improves user understanding** of complex actions or terminology.
- **Enhances accessibility** when used correctly with keyboard and screen reader support.
- **Provides instant feedback** without disrupting the user’s flow.

## Drawbacks

- Can be **difficult to trigger** on mobile devices due to the lack of hover interactions.
- Often **overlooked by users**, especially if they don't expect additional information.
- May **interfere with content visibility**, particularly if not positioned well.
- Can cause **accessibility issues** if not properly implemented for keyboard and screen readers.
- If tooltips **disappear too quickly**, users may struggle to read the content.

## Anatomy

## Anatomy

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[Tooltip] --> B[Trigger Element]
    B -->|Hover/Focus| C[Tooltip Box]
    C --> D[Tooltip Content]
    C --> E[Optional Interactive Elements]
```

### Component Structure

1. **Trigger Element**

- The interactive element (e.g., button, icon, text) that activates the tooltip.
- Should have **`aria-describedby`** linking to the tooltip content for accessibility.
- Can be activated by **hover (mouse), focus (keyboard), or tap (touch devices)**.
- Should have a **clear focus indicator** when navigated via keyboard.

2. **Tooltip Box**

- The container that appears when the tooltip is activated.
- Should be **positioned near the trigger element** for contextual relevance.
- Should have **`role="tooltip"`** for proper screen reader support.

3. **Tooltip Content**

- Contains the **explanatory text or information**.
- Should be **short and concise** to avoid overwhelming users.
- Should **not contain interactive elements** like links or buttons in simple tooltips.

4. **Arrow (Optional)**

- A **visual pointer** indicating the tooltip's source.
- Adjusts dynamically **based on the tooltip’s position** (e.g., top, bottom, left, right).

5. **Optional Interactive Elements (For Rich Tooltips)**

- Some tooltips allow **links, buttons, or other interactive elements**.
- Requires **`aria-haspopup="true"` and `aria-expanded="true|false"`** for accessibility.
- Should **remain open while interacting** and dismiss only when clicking outside or pressing `Esc`.

6. **Dismiss Behavior**

- Simple tooltips **should disappear on mouse-out, focus loss, or tap elsewhere**.
- Rich tooltips **should remain open until dismissed manually**.

#### **📌 Summary of Components**

| Component                | Required? | Purpose                                        |
| ------------------------ | --------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| **Trigger Element**      | ✅ Yes    | The element that triggers the tooltip.         |
| **Tooltip Box**          | ✅ Yes    | Contains the tooltip message.                  |
| **Tooltip Content**      | ✅ Yes    | Displays a short explanatory message.          |
| **Arrow**                | ❌ No     | Visually connects the tooltip to the trigger.  |
| **Interactive Elements** | ❌ No     | Enables links or buttons inside rich tooltips. |
| **Dismiss Behavior**     | ✅ Yes    | Defines how and when the tooltip should close. |

## Best Practices

### Content

**Do's for Simple Tooltips ✅**

- **Keep concise**—**1-2 sentences max** to provide quick context.
- **Trigger on hover and focus** for accessibility.
- **Position strategically** to **avoid covering nearby elements**.

**Do's for Rich Tooltips ✅**

- **Use when additional context is needed** (e.g., explanations, formatted text).
- **Ensure it remains visible until dismissed**, if interactive.
- **Allow keyboard navigation** if containing buttons or links.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Avoid tooltips for critical information**—users might miss them.
- **Don’t overuse long tooltips**—consider using a popover or [modal](/patterns/content-management/modal).
- **Avoid adding interactive elements** (buttons, links) inside tooltips unless using an accessible popover.

### Accessibility

**Do's for Simple Tooltips ✅**

- **Ensure they appear on `focus` as well as hover**.
- **Use `aria-describedby`** on the trigger element to associate it with the tooltip.
- **Provide `role="tooltip"`** for proper screen reader support.

**Do's for Rich Tooltips ✅**

- **If interactive, use `aria-haspopup="true"`** and **`aria-expanded="true|false"`**.
- **Allow users to dismiss using Escape key**.
- **Ensure users can tab into and out of the tooltip seamlessly**.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Don't rely only on hover-based activation**—ensure focus also triggers tooltips.
- **Avoid auto-closing tooltips too quickly**, which may frustrate users.
- **Don't position tooltips in a way that obstructs other content**.

### Visual Design

**Do's ✅**

- **Use subtle animations** (fade-in, fade-out) for smooth appearance.
- **Ensure tooltips have readable font sizes** (at least `14px`).
- **Maintain sufficient padding and spacing** for easy readability.
- **Use arrows or indicators** to clearly point to the related element.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Avoid excessive delays in showing tooltips**—users should see them instantly.
- **Don't use tooltips that disappear too quickly** before users can read them.
- **Avoid distracting animations** that hinder usability.

### Performance Optimization

**Do's ✅**

- **Lazy-load tooltips** to reduce initial page load impact.
- **Use CSS for animations** (`opacity`, `transform`) instead of JavaScript.
- **Minimize reflows and repaints** when tooltips appear or disappear.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Avoid excessive event listeners** that degrade performance.
- **Don't trigger tooltips on every mouse movement**—use `mouseenter` instead of `mousemove`.

## Code Examples

### Basic Implementation

```html
<!-- Tooltip Trigger -->
<button aria-describedby="tooltip-example" class="tooltip-trigger">?</button>

<!-- Tooltip -->
<div id="tooltip-example" role="tooltip" class="tooltip-content">
  This is additional information about the element.
</div>
```

## Accessibility

### Keyboard Interaction Pattern

The following table outlines the standard keyboard interactions for tooltip components. These interactions ensure that users can access and dismiss tooltips effectively using only a keyboard.

| Key         | Action                                                                                           |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Tab         | Moves focus to the element that triggers the tooltip. The tooltip should appear on focus.        |
| Shift + Tab | Moves focus to the previous interactive element. The tooltip should close when focus moves away. |
| Escape      | Dismisses the tooltip manually (if dismissible).                                                 |
| Enter/Space | Activates the tooltip (for tooltips that require explicit activation).                           |

> **Note**: Tooltips should appear when an element **receives focus** (for keyboard users) and **disappear when focus moves away**. If a tooltip is **interactive** (contains links or buttons), it must be dismissible via the `Escape` key.

## Testing Guidelines

### Functional Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Ensure the tooltip **appears on hover, focus, and touch activation**.
- [ ] Verify the tooltip **disappears when focus is removed** or the user moves the cursor away.
- [ ] Test that tooltips **do not obstruct important content** when displayed.
- [ ] Confirm that tooltips **adapt properly on different screen sizes**.
- [ ] Validate that tooltips **do not break layout or cause visual glitches**.

### Accessibility Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Ensure tooltips are **keyboard accessible** (triggered via `Tab` key).
- [ ] Verify that tooltips are **announced by screen readers** when triggered.
- [ ] Confirm `aria-describedby` **correctly links tooltips to their respective elements**.
- [ ] Check that tooltips **persist long enough** for screen reader users to read.
- [ ] Ensure **sufficient color contrast** between tooltip text and background.
- [ ] Test with `prefers-reduced-motion` enabled to ensure animations are minimized.

### Visual Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Confirm tooltip text is **legible across all screen sizes**.
- [ ] Validate **proper spacing and positioning** of tooltips.
- [ ] Test tooltip animations for **smooth appearance and disappearance**.
- [ ] Ensure tooltips **do not overlap critical UI elements**.
- [ ] Verify tooltips **align properly with their trigger elements**.

### Performance Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Measure tooltip render performance to **avoid jank or slow animations**.
- [ ] Ensure tooltips **lazy-load when necessary** to prevent excessive memory usage.
- [ ] Optimize tooltip animations to **use `opacity` and `transform` for smooth rendering**.
- [ ] Test for **efficient event handling** to avoid performance degradation on repeated interactions.

## Design Tokens

These design tokens follow the [Design Tokens Format](https://design-tokens.github.io/community-group/format/) specification and can be used with various token transformation tools to generate platform-specific variables.

### Tooltip Tokens in DTF Format

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://design-tokens.org/schema.json",
  "tooltip": {
    "background": { "value": "{color.gray.900}", "type": "color" },
    "textColor": { "value": "{color.white}", "type": "color" },
    "padding": { "value": "0.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
    "borderRadius": { "value": "4px", "type": "borderRadius" },
    "animationDuration": { "value": "150ms", "type": "duration" },
    "maxWidth": { "value": "200px", "type": "dimension" },
    "arrowSize": { "value": "6px", "type": "dimension" },
    "offset": { "value": "8px", "type": "dimension" },
    "shadow": { "value": "{shadow.md}", "type": "shadow" }
  }
}
```

## Related Patterns

Consider these related patterns when implementing tooltips:

- [Modal](/patterns/content-management/modal) - Used for critical interactions requiring full focus.
- [Popover](/patterns/content-management/popover) - Used when the additional content that requires user interaction, such as buttons or form elements, rather than just providing passive information.
- [Selection Input / Dropdown](/patterns/forms/selection-input) - Best for more complex navigation menus.

## Resources

### Articles

- [Tooltip - Nielsen Norman Group](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/tooltip-guidelines/)
- [Designing better tooltips for improved UX - LogRocket Blog](https://blog.logrocket.com/ux-design/designing-better-tooltips-improved-ux/)

### Documentation

- [Tooltip Pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/tooltip/)

### Libraries

- [Tooltip - shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components/tooltip)
- [Tooltip - Origin UI](https://originui.com/tooltip)

Commit message:

feat: add summary and update description seo

content/en/patterns/content-management/tooltip.mdx, after:

---
summary: "Provide additional context on hover or focus"
description: "Implement effective tooltip components in your web applications. Learn best practices for contextual help, positioning strategies, and accessibility considerations."
icon: MessageCircle
status: complete
---

import { BuildEffort } from "@app/_components/build-effort";

# Tooltip

**_(Also called hover hint, info bubble)_**

## Overview

A **tooltip** is a small popup that provides additional contextual information when a user hovers over, focuses on, or interacts with an element. It helps clarify elements with **icons, buttons, or text snippets** that may not be self-explanatory.

There are **two types of tooltips**:

- **Simple Tooltips** – Short text descriptions that appear on hover or focus, providing a brief explanation.
- **Rich Tooltips** – Enhanced tooltips that may contain **formatted text, icons, images, or interactive elements**.

Tooltips should be used to enhance understanding without overwhelming the user interface.

<BuildEffort
  level="low"
  description="Simple hover/focus effect. Requires ARIA attributes (`aria-describedby`) for accessibility but no complex state management."
/>

## Use Cases

### When to use:

Use a tooltip when you need to provide **additional context or explanations** without taking up extra space in the UI.

**Common use cases include:**

**Simple Tooltips**

- **Clarifying icons or abbreviations** (e.g., a settings cog, currency symbols).
- **Providing additional information** about form fields or table headers.
- **Showing helper text** for complex actions (e.g., "This action is permanent").
- **Explaining disabled elements** when a user cannot interact with them.
- **Providing keyboard shortcuts** when hovering over action buttons.

**Rich Tooltips**

- **Providing in-depth explanations** beyond a brief description.
- **Displaying small images, formatted text, or interactive content**.
- **Presenting additional details about data points in charts**.
- **Showing user profile previews in social apps**.

### When not to use:

- **For critical information** users must read, such as error messages.
- **For content that should remain visible**, like persistent hints or descriptions.
- **When users need to interact** with the tooltip itself.
- **If the tooltip is the only means** of conveying information (accessibility issue).
- **For mobile-first interactions** where hover-based behavior isn't intuitive.

## Benefits

- **Reduces clutter** by providing contextual information without crowding the UI.
- **Improves user understanding** of complex actions or terminology.
- **Enhances accessibility** when used correctly with keyboard and screen reader support.
- **Provides instant feedback** without disrupting the user's flow.

## Drawbacks

- Can be **difficult to trigger** on mobile devices due to the lack of hover interactions.
- Often **overlooked by users**, especially if they don't expect additional information.
- May **interfere with content visibility**, particularly if not positioned well.
- Can cause **accessibility issues** if not properly implemented for keyboard and screen readers.
- If tooltips **disappear too quickly**, users may struggle to read the content.

## Anatomy

## Anatomy

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[Tooltip] --> B[Trigger Element]
    B -->|Hover/Focus| C[Tooltip Box]
    C --> D[Tooltip Content]
    C --> E[Optional Interactive Elements]
```

### Component Structure

1. **Trigger Element**

- The interactive element (e.g., button, icon, text) that activates the tooltip.
- Should have **`aria-describedby`** linking to the tooltip content for accessibility.
- Can be activated by **hover (mouse), focus (keyboard), or tap (touch devices)**.
- Should have a **clear focus indicator** when navigated via keyboard.

2. **Tooltip Box**

- The container that appears when the tooltip is activated.
- Should be **positioned near the trigger element** for contextual relevance.
- Should have **`role="tooltip"`** for proper screen reader support.

3. **Tooltip Content**

- Contains the **explanatory text or information**.
- Should be **short and concise** to avoid overwhelming users.
- Should **not contain interactive elements** like links or buttons in simple tooltips.

4. **Arrow (Optional)**

- A **visual pointer** indicating the tooltip's source.
- Adjusts dynamically **based on the tooltip's position** (e.g., top, bottom, left, right).

5. **Optional Interactive Elements (For Rich Tooltips)**

- Some tooltips allow **links, buttons, or other interactive elements**.
- Requires **`aria-haspopup="true"` and `aria-expanded="true|false"`** for accessibility.
- Should **remain open while interacting** and dismiss only when clicking outside or pressing `Esc`.

6. **Dismiss Behavior**

- Simple tooltips **should disappear on mouse-out, focus loss, or tap elsewhere**.
- Rich tooltips **should remain open until dismissed manually**.

#### **📌 Summary of Components**

| Component                | Required? | Purpose                                        |
| ------------------------ | --------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| **Trigger Element**      | ✅ Yes    | The element that triggers the tooltip.         |
| **Tooltip Box**          | ✅ Yes    | Contains the tooltip message.                  |
| **Tooltip Content**      | ✅ Yes    | Displays a short explanatory message.          |
| **Arrow**                | ❌ No     | Visually connects the tooltip to the trigger.  |
| **Interactive Elements** | ❌ No     | Enables links or buttons inside rich tooltips. |
| **Dismiss Behavior**     | ✅ Yes    | Defines how and when the tooltip should close. |

## Best Practices

### Content

**Do's for Simple Tooltips ✅**

- **Keep concise**—**1-2 sentences max** to provide quick context.
- **Trigger on hover and focus** for accessibility.
- **Position strategically** to **avoid covering nearby elements**.

**Do's for Rich Tooltips ✅**

- **Use when additional context is needed** (e.g., explanations, formatted text).
- **Ensure it remains visible until dismissed**, if interactive.
- **Allow keyboard navigation** if containing buttons or links.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Avoid tooltips for critical information**—users might miss them.
- **Don't overuse long tooltips**—consider using a popover or [modal](/patterns/content-management/modal).
- **Avoid adding interactive elements** (buttons, links) inside tooltips unless using an accessible popover.

### Accessibility

**Do's for Simple Tooltips ✅**

- **Ensure they appear on `focus` as well as hover**.
- **Use `aria-describedby`** on the trigger element to associate it with the tooltip.
- **Provide `role="tooltip"`** for proper screen reader support.

**Do's for Rich Tooltips ✅**

- **If interactive, use `aria-haspopup="true"`** and **`aria-expanded="true|false"`**.
- **Allow users to dismiss using Escape key**.
- **Ensure users can tab into and out of the tooltip seamlessly**.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Don't rely only on hover-based activation**—ensure focus also triggers tooltips.
- **Avoid auto-closing tooltips too quickly**, which may frustrate users.
- **Don't position tooltips in a way that obstructs other content**.

### Visual Design

**Do's ✅**

- **Use subtle animations** (fade-in, fade-out) for smooth appearance.
- **Ensure tooltips have readable font sizes** (at least `14px`).
- **Maintain sufficient padding and spacing** for easy readability.
- **Use arrows or indicators** to clearly point to the related element.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Avoid excessive delays in showing tooltips**—users should see them instantly.
- **Don't use tooltips that disappear too quickly** before users can read them.
- **Avoid distracting animations** that hinder usability.

### Performance Optimization

**Do's ✅**

- **Lazy-load tooltips** to reduce initial page load impact.
- **Use CSS for animations** (`opacity`, `transform`) instead of JavaScript.
- **Minimize reflows and repaints** when tooltips appear or disappear.

**Don'ts ❌**

- **Avoid excessive event listeners** that degrade performance.
- **Don't trigger tooltips on every mouse movement**—use `mouseenter` instead of `mousemove`.

## Code Examples

### Basic Implementation

```html
<!-- Tooltip Trigger -->
<button aria-describedby="tooltip-example" class="tooltip-trigger">?</button>

<!-- Tooltip -->
<div id="tooltip-example" role="tooltip" class="tooltip-content">
  This is additional information about the element.
</div>
```

## Accessibility

### Keyboard Interaction Pattern

The following table outlines the standard keyboard interactions for tooltip components. These interactions ensure that users can access and dismiss tooltips effectively using only a keyboard.

| Key         | Action                                                                                           |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Tab         | Moves focus to the element that triggers the tooltip. The tooltip should appear on focus.        |
| Shift + Tab | Moves focus to the previous interactive element. The tooltip should close when focus moves away. |
| Escape      | Dismisses the tooltip manually (if dismissible).                                                 |
| Enter/Space | Activates the tooltip (for tooltips that require explicit activation).                           |

> **Note**: Tooltips should appear when an element **receives focus** (for keyboard users) and **disappear when focus moves away**. If a tooltip is **interactive** (contains links or buttons), it must be dismissible via the `Escape` key.

## Testing Guidelines

### Functional Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Ensure the tooltip **appears on hover, focus, and touch activation**.
- [ ] Verify the tooltip **disappears when focus is removed** or the user moves the cursor away.
- [ ] Test that tooltips **do not obstruct important content** when displayed.
- [ ] Confirm that tooltips **adapt properly on different screen sizes**.
- [ ] Validate that tooltips **do not break layout or cause visual glitches**.

### Accessibility Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Ensure tooltips are **keyboard accessible** (triggered via `Tab` key).
- [ ] Verify that tooltips are **announced by screen readers** when triggered.
- [ ] Confirm `aria-describedby` **correctly links tooltips to their respective elements**.
- [ ] Check that tooltips **persist long enough** for screen reader users to read.
- [ ] Ensure **sufficient color contrast** between tooltip text and background.
- [ ] Test with `prefers-reduced-motion` enabled to ensure animations are minimized.

### Visual Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Confirm tooltip text is **legible across all screen sizes**.
- [ ] Validate **proper spacing and positioning** of tooltips.
- [ ] Test tooltip animations for **smooth appearance and disappearance**.
- [ ] Ensure tooltips **do not overlap critical UI elements**.
- [ ] Verify tooltips **align properly with their trigger elements**.

### Performance Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Measure tooltip render performance to **avoid jank or slow animations**.
- [ ] Ensure tooltips **lazy-load when necessary** to prevent excessive memory usage.
- [ ] Optimize tooltip animations to **use `opacity` and `transform` for smooth rendering**.
- [ ] Test for **efficient event handling** to avoid performance degradation on repeated interactions.

## Design Tokens

These design tokens follow the [Design Tokens Format](https://design-tokens.github.io/community-group/format/) specification and can be used with various token transformation tools to generate platform-specific variables.

### Tooltip Tokens in DTF Format

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://design-tokens.org/schema.json",
  "tooltip": {
    "background": { "value": "{color.gray.900}", "type": "color" },
    "textColor": { "value": "{color.white}", "type": "color" },
    "padding": { "value": "0.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
    "borderRadius": { "value": "4px", "type": "borderRadius" },
    "animationDuration": { "value": "150ms", "type": "duration" },
    "maxWidth": { "value": "200px", "type": "dimension" },
    "arrowSize": { "value": "6px", "type": "dimension" },
    "offset": { "value": "8px", "type": "dimension" },
    "shadow": { "value": "{shadow.md}", "type": "shadow" }
  }
}
```

## Related Patterns

Consider these related patterns when implementing tooltips:

- [Modal](/patterns/content-management/modal) - Used for critical interactions requiring full focus.
- [Popover](/patterns/content-management/popover) - Used when the additional content that requires user interaction, such as buttons or form elements, rather than just providing passive information.
- [Selection Input / Dropdown](/patterns/forms/selection-input) - Best for more complex navigation menus.

## Resources

### Articles

- [Tooltip - Nielsen Norman Group](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/tooltip-guidelines/)
- [Designing better tooltips for improved UX - LogRocket Blog](https://blog.logrocket.com/ux-design/designing-better-tooltips-improved-ux/)

### Documentation

- [Tooltip Pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/tooltip/)

### Libraries

- [Tooltip - shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components/tooltip)
- [Tooltip - Origin UI](https://originui.com/tooltip)
