content/en/patterns/navigation/breadcrumb.mdx, before:

---
description: "Help users understand their current location"
icon: Navigation2
status: complete
---

import { BuildEffort } from "@app/_components/build-effort";

# Breadcrumb

## Overview

**Breadcrumbs**, often displayed as a horizontal list of links separated by symbols, help users understand their location in a website’s hierarchy at a glance.

They are secondary navigation aids that help users understand their current location within a website's hierarchy and provide an easy way to navigate back through parent pages.

They are particularly useful for websites with deep hierarchical structures or complex navigation paths.

<BuildEffort
  level="medium"
  description="Requires structured navigation, ARIA attributes (`aria-label`, `aria-current`), and responsive handling for long paths."
/>

## Use Cases

### When to use:

Use **Breadcrumbs** when you need to **show users their location within a website’s structure and help them navigate easily**.

**Common scenarios include:**

- Websites with multiple hierarchical levels (e.g., categories, sub-categories)
- Large or complex sites where users often land on deep pages from search engines
- Systems that rely on nested file or document organization (e.g., file explorers, project management tools)
- E-commerce stores with layered product categories

### When not to use:

- Single-level websites with flat structure
- Landing pages or homepages
- Small websites with simple navigation
- When the hierarchy is already evident through other navigation elements
- For single-page applications with modal-based navigation

### Common scenarios and examples

- E-commerce: Home > Electronics > Smartphones > iPhone 15
- Content Management: Dashboard > Projects > Project A > Documents
- File Systems: My Drive > Work > 2024 > Reports

## Benefits

- Reduces the number of actions users need to take to navigate up levels
- Prevents users from feeling lost in complex hierarchies
- Improves SEO by exposing site structure
- Reduces bounce rates for deep-linked pages
- Provides contextual information about current location

## Drawbacks

- **Limited usefulness** – Not always needed if users primarily land on deeper pages from external links.
- **Takes up space** – Can be redundant on small screens or when users don’t need hierarchical navigation.
- **Responsive design complexity** – Long breadcrumb trails require truncation or horizontal scrolling.
- **Requires structured data** – Must be correctly implemented for SEO benefits (e.g., schema markup).
- **Misuse in flat hierarchies** – Not beneficial if the site structure doesn’t follow a clear depth-based navigation.

## Anatomy

```mermaid
flowchart TB
subgraph Breadcrumb[Breadcrumb Navigation]
A[Home] -.->|separator| B[Parent Page]
B -.->|separator| C[Current Page]

classDef container stroke:#666,stroke-width:2px
class Breadcrumb container
end
```

### Component Structure

1. **Container (`nav`)**

- Wraps the entire breadcrumb navigation.
- Uses **semantic navigation elements** for accessibility.
- Should be properly labeled for **screen readers**.

2. **List (`ol`)**

- Contains the **breadcrumb items** in sequential order.
- Represents the **hierarchical structure** of the page.
- Typically implemented as an **ordered list** to convey structure.

3. **Items (`li`)**

- **Home Link (Optional):** A starting point linking to the homepage.
- **Parent Pages:** Clickable links that represent higher levels of navigation.
- **Current Page:** The final item, which **should not be a link** since it represents the current view.
- **Separators:** Visual dividers (e.g., `/`, `>`), providing clear navigation hierarchy.

#### **📌 Summary of Components**

| Component        | Required? | Purpose                                               |
| ---------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| **Container**    | ✅ Yes    | Wraps the entire breadcrumb navigation.               |
| **List**         | ✅ Yes    | Contains the breadcrumb items in order.               |
| **Items**        | ✅ Yes    | Represents individual breadcrumb links.               |
| **Separators**   | ✅ Yes    | Visually separates breadcrumb links.                  |
| **Home Link**    | ❌ No     | Provides an optional shortcut to the homepage.        |
| **Current Page** | ✅ Yes    | Represents the active page (should not be clickable). |

## Best Practices

### Content

**Do's ✅**

- Use clear, concise labels that match page titles
- Maintain consistent naming conventions
- Show the full hierarchy path

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't use inconsistent terminology between breadcrumb items and page titles
- Don't truncate breadcrumb items without indicating there's more content

### Accessibility

**Do's ✅**

- Maintain the icon's accessibility by including proper aria-label
- Give users quick confirmation of where they are in the hierarchy
- Use semantic HTML elements

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't make the current page title clickable
- Don't use a breadcrumb if the user is already at the top level of the hierarchy

### Visual Design

**Do's ✅**

- Make it obvious that the last item is not clickable (through color, cursor type, etc.)
- Use consistent visual styling across all pages
- Ensure sufficient contrast between text and background

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't use distracting animations or transitions
- Don't make separators too prominent

### Layout & Positioning

**Do's ✅**

- Place the breadcrumb at the top of the page, below the global navigation and above the page title
- Keep the breadcrumb left-aligned
- Consider showing both icon and text on larger screens
- Consider showing a house icon instead of text "Home" on smaller screens

**Don'ts ❌**

- Do not show a breadcrumb if the navigation's hierarchy contains only one level (home page or landing pages for example)
- Do not use an HTML element for separators but prefer using CSS

## Code Examples

### Basic Implementation

This example uses semantic HTML to provide a clear structure for the breadcrumb navigation.

```html
<nav aria-label="Breadcrumb">
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="https://example.com">
        <span>Home</span>
      </a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="https://example.com/products">
        <span>Products</span>
      </a>
    </li>

    <li>
      <span aria-current="page">Current Page</span>
    </li>
  </ol>
</nav>
```

### JSON-LD Structured Data

This example demonstrates how to dynamically generate the breadcrumb JSON-LD structured Data using JavaScript.

```javascript
const breadcrumbs = [
  { title: "Home", url: "https://example.com" },
  { title: "Products", url: "https://example.com/products" },
  { title: "Current Page" },
];

function generateBreadcrumbSchema(breadcrumbs) {
  return {
    "@context": "https://schema.org",
    "@type": "BreadcrumbList",
    itemListElement: breadcrumbs.map((crumb, index) => {
      const isLastItem = index === breadcrumbs.length - 1;

      const baseItem = {
        "@type": "ListItem",
        position: index + 1,
        name: crumb.title,
      };

      // Only add the "item" property if it's not the last item and has a URL
      if (!isLastItem && crumb.url) {
        baseItem.item = crumb.url;
      }

      return baseItem;
    }),
  };
}
```

## SEO

### Structured Data

- Implement breadcrumb structured data using [Schema.org markup](https://schema.org/BreadcrumbList) to help search engines understand your site's hierarchy
- This improves the way your site appears in search results and helps search engines better understand your content structure
  Example JSON-LD structured data:

```json
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "BreadcrumbList",
  "itemListElement": [
    {
      "@type": "ListItem",
      "position": 1,
      "name": "Home",
      "item": "https://example.com"
    },
    {
      "@type": "ListItem",
      "position": 2,
      "name": "Products",
      "item": "https://example.com/products"
    },
    {
      "@type": "ListItem",
      "position": 3,
      "name": "Current Page"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Testing & Validation

- Use Google's [Rich Results Test](https://search.google.com/test/rich-results) to validate structured data
- Monitor breadcrumb appearance in search results through Google Search Console
- Check for proper indexing of breadcrumb pages in site architecture
- Verify mobile rendering of breadcrumbs for mobile-first indexing

## Testing Guidelines

### Functional Testing

**Should ✓**

- Navigate to the correct page when clicking each breadcrumb link
- Show the complete hierarchy path from home to current page
- Update breadcrumb trail when navigating through different levels
- Maintain state after page refresh
- Work with browser back/forward navigation

### Accessibility Testing

**Should ✓**

- Be navigable using keyboard (Tab and Enter keys)
- Have proper ARIA labels and roles
- Announce proper hierarchy to screen readers
- Maintain focus state visibility
- Have sufficient color contrast (WCAG 2.1 AA)

### Responsive Testing

**Should ✓**

- Adapt layout for different screen sizes
- Show/hide home icon appropriately
- Handle text overflow gracefully
- Maintain touch target sizes on mobile (minimum 44x44px)
- Preserve functionality across different devices

### SEO Testing

**Should ✓**

- Include proper Schema.org markup
- Have semantic HTML structure
- Maintain consistent URL structure
- Include relevant meta tags
- Follow proper link hierarchy

### Performance Testing

**Should ✓**

- Load without significant delay
- Not cause layout shifts
- Handle large numbers of items efficiently
- Work with dynamic content updates
- Function without JavaScript (progressive enhancement)

## Resources

### Articles

- [Breadcrumbs: 11 Design Guidelines for Desktop and Mobile](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/breadcrumbs/) by Nielsen Norman Group
- [Designing Effective Breadcrumbs Navigation — Smashing Magazine](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2022/04/breadcrumbs-ux-design/)
- [Breadcrumb Pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/breadcrumb/) by W3C
- [Breadcrumbs](https://a11y-style-guide.com/style-guide/section-navigation.html#kssref-navigation-breadcrumbs) - By A11y Style guide

### Libraries

- [Breadcrumb: shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components/breadcrumb)
- [Breadcrumb - Origin UI](https://originui.com/breadcrumb)

Commit message:

feat: add summary and update description seo

content/en/patterns/navigation/breadcrumb.mdx, after:

---
summary: "Help users understand their current location"
description: "Create effective breadcrumb navigation for better site orientation. Learn implementation techniques, accessibility requirements, and design best practices for clear hierarchical navigation."
icon: Navigation2
status: complete
---

import { BuildEffort } from "@app/_components/build-effort";

# Breadcrumb

## Overview

**Breadcrumbs**, often displayed as a horizontal list of links separated by symbols, help users understand their location in a website's hierarchy at a glance.

They are secondary navigation aids that help users understand their current location within a website's hierarchy and provide an easy way to navigate back through parent pages.

They are particularly useful for websites with deep hierarchical structures or complex navigation paths.

<BuildEffort
  level="medium"
  description="Requires structured navigation, ARIA attributes (`aria-label`, `aria-current`), and responsive handling for long paths."
/>

## Use Cases

### When to use:

Use **Breadcrumbs** when you need to **show users their location within a website's structure and help them navigate easily**.

**Common scenarios include:**

- Websites with multiple hierarchical levels (e.g., categories, sub-categories)
- Large or complex sites where users often land on deep pages from search engines
- Systems that rely on nested file or document organization (e.g., file explorers, project management tools)
- E-commerce stores with layered product categories

### When not to use:

- Single-level websites with flat structure
- Landing pages or homepages
- Small websites with simple navigation
- When the hierarchy is already evident through other navigation elements
- For single-page applications with modal-based navigation

### Common scenarios and examples

- E-commerce: Home > Electronics > Smartphones > iPhone 15
- Content Management: Dashboard > Projects > Project A > Documents
- File Systems: My Drive > Work > 2024 > Reports

## Benefits

- Reduces the number of actions users need to take to navigate up levels
- Prevents users from feeling lost in complex hierarchies
- Improves SEO by exposing site structure
- Reduces bounce rates for deep-linked pages
- Provides contextual information about current location

## Drawbacks

- **Limited usefulness** – Not always needed if users primarily land on deeper pages from external links.
- **Takes up space** – Can be redundant on small screens or when users don't need hierarchical navigation.
- **Responsive design complexity** – Long breadcrumb trails require truncation or horizontal scrolling.
- **Requires structured data** – Must be correctly implemented for SEO benefits (e.g., schema markup).
- **Misuse in flat hierarchies** – Not beneficial if the site structure doesn't follow a clear depth-based navigation.

## Anatomy

```mermaid
flowchart TB
subgraph Breadcrumb[Breadcrumb Navigation]
A[Home] -.->|separator| B[Parent Page]
B -.->|separator| C[Current Page]

classDef container stroke:#666,stroke-width:2px
class Breadcrumb container
end
```

### Component Structure

1. **Container (`nav`)**

- Wraps the entire breadcrumb navigation.
- Uses **semantic navigation elements** for accessibility.
- Should be properly labeled for **screen readers**.

2. **List (`ol`)**

- Contains the **breadcrumb items** in sequential order.
- Represents the **hierarchical structure** of the page.
- Typically implemented as an **ordered list** to convey structure.

3. **Items (`li`)**

- **Home Link (Optional):** A starting point linking to the homepage.
- **Parent Pages:** Clickable links that represent higher levels of navigation.
- **Current Page:** The final item, which **should not be a link** since it represents the current view.
- **Separators:** Visual dividers (e.g., `/`, `>`), providing clear navigation hierarchy.

#### **📌 Summary of Components**

| Component        | Required? | Purpose                                               |
| ---------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| **Container**    | ✅ Yes    | Wraps the entire breadcrumb navigation.               |
| **List**         | ✅ Yes    | Contains the breadcrumb items in order.               |
| **Items**        | ✅ Yes    | Represents individual breadcrumb links.               |
| **Separators**   | ✅ Yes    | Visually separates breadcrumb links.                  |
| **Home Link**    | ❌ No     | Provides an optional shortcut to the homepage.        |
| **Current Page** | ✅ Yes    | Represents the active page (should not be clickable). |

## Best Practices

### Content

**Do's ✅**

- Use clear, concise labels that match page titles
- Maintain consistent naming conventions
- Show the full hierarchy path

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't use inconsistent terminology between breadcrumb items and page titles
- Don't truncate breadcrumb items without indicating there's more content

### Accessibility

**Do's ✅**

- Maintain the icon's accessibility by including proper aria-label
- Give users quick confirmation of where they are in the hierarchy
- Use semantic HTML elements

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't make the current page title clickable
- Don't use a breadcrumb if the user is already at the top level of the hierarchy

### Visual Design

**Do's ✅**

- Make it obvious that the last item is not clickable (through color, cursor type, etc.)
- Use consistent visual styling across all pages
- Ensure sufficient contrast between text and background

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't use distracting animations or transitions
- Don't make separators too prominent

### Layout & Positioning

**Do's ✅**

- Place the breadcrumb at the top of the page, below the global navigation and above the page title
- Keep the breadcrumb left-aligned
- Consider showing both icon and text on larger screens
- Consider showing a house icon instead of text "Home" on smaller screens

**Don'ts ❌**

- Do not show a breadcrumb if the navigation's hierarchy contains only one level (home page or landing pages for example)
- Do not use an HTML element for separators but prefer using CSS

## Code Examples

### Basic Implementation

This example uses semantic HTML to provide a clear structure for the breadcrumb navigation.

```html
<nav aria-label="Breadcrumb">
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="https://example.com">
        <span>Home</span>
      </a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="https://example.com/products">
        <span>Products</span>
      </a>
    </li>

    <li>
      <span aria-current="page">Current Page</span>
    </li>
  </ol>
</nav>
```

### JSON-LD Structured Data

This example demonstrates how to dynamically generate the breadcrumb JSON-LD structured Data using JavaScript.

```javascript
const breadcrumbs = [
  { title: "Home", url: "https://example.com" },
  { title: "Products", url: "https://example.com/products" },
  { title: "Current Page" },
];

function generateBreadcrumbSchema(breadcrumbs) {
  return {
    "@context": "https://schema.org",
    "@type": "BreadcrumbList",
    itemListElement: breadcrumbs.map((crumb, index) => {
      const isLastItem = index === breadcrumbs.length - 1;

      const baseItem = {
        "@type": "ListItem",
        position: index + 1,
        name: crumb.title,
      };

      // Only add the "item" property if it's not the last item and has a URL
      if (!isLastItem && crumb.url) {
        baseItem.item = crumb.url;
      }

      return baseItem;
    }),
  };
}
```

## SEO

### Structured Data

- Implement breadcrumb structured data using [Schema.org markup](https://schema.org/BreadcrumbList) to help search engines understand your site's hierarchy
- This improves the way your site appears in search results and helps search engines better understand your content structure
  Example JSON-LD structured data:

```json
{
  "@context": "https://schema.org",
  "@type": "BreadcrumbList",
  "itemListElement": [
    {
      "@type": "ListItem",
      "position": 1,
      "name": "Home",
      "item": "https://example.com"
    },
    {
      "@type": "ListItem",
      "position": 2,
      "name": "Products",
      "item": "https://example.com/products"
    },
    {
      "@type": "ListItem",
      "position": 3,
      "name": "Current Page"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Testing & Validation

- Use Google's [Rich Results Test](https://search.google.com/test/rich-results) to validate structured data
- Monitor breadcrumb appearance in search results through Google Search Console
- Check for proper indexing of breadcrumb pages in site architecture
- Verify mobile rendering of breadcrumbs for mobile-first indexing

## Testing Guidelines

### Functional Testing

**Should ✓**

- Navigate to the correct page when clicking each breadcrumb link
- Show the complete hierarchy path from home to current page
- Update breadcrumb trail when navigating through different levels
- Maintain state after page refresh
- Work with browser back/forward navigation

### Accessibility Testing

**Should ✓**

- Be navigable using keyboard (Tab and Enter keys)
- Have proper ARIA labels and roles
- Announce proper hierarchy to screen readers
- Maintain focus state visibility
- Have sufficient color contrast (WCAG 2.1 AA)

### Responsive Testing

**Should ✓**

- Adapt layout for different screen sizes
- Show/hide home icon appropriately
- Handle text overflow gracefully
- Maintain touch target sizes on mobile (minimum 44x44px)
- Preserve functionality across different devices

### SEO Testing

**Should ✓**

- Include proper Schema.org markup
- Have semantic HTML structure
- Maintain consistent URL structure
- Include relevant meta tags
- Follow proper link hierarchy

### Performance Testing

**Should ✓**

- Load without significant delay
- Not cause layout shifts
- Handle large numbers of items efficiently
- Work with dynamic content updates
- Function without JavaScript (progressive enhancement)

## Resources

### Articles

- [Breadcrumbs: 11 Design Guidelines for Desktop and Mobile](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/breadcrumbs/) by Nielsen Norman Group
- [Designing Effective Breadcrumbs Navigation — Smashing Magazine](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2022/04/breadcrumbs-ux-design/)
- [Breadcrumb Pattern](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/breadcrumb/) by W3C
- [Breadcrumbs](https://a11y-style-guide.com/style-guide/section-navigation.html#kssref-navigation-breadcrumbs) - By A11y Style guide

### Libraries

- [Breadcrumb: shadcn/ui](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components/breadcrumb)
- [Breadcrumb - Origin UI](https://originui.com/breadcrumb)
