content/en/patterns/forms/button.mdx, before:

---
description: "Trigger actions and submit forms"
icon: MousePointerClick
status: complete
---

import { BrowserSupport } from "@app/_components/browser-support";

# Button

## Overview

**Buttons** are interactive elements that trigger actions or events when clicked or interacted with.

## Use Cases

### When to use:

- To trigger an immediate action or event (e.g., "Save", "Delete", "Send")
- To submit a form
- To open or close interactive elements (modals, dialogs, menus)
- To toggle between states (e.g., play/pause, show/hide)
- To download files or content
- To navigate between steps in a multi-step process

### When not to use:

- For navigation between pages (use links instead)
- When the action isn't immediately clear to users
- For text-only content that doesn't trigger an action
- When the interaction would be better served by a different component (e.g., checkbox, toggle switch)
- When multiple conflicting actions are grouped together
- When the action requires additional context that isn't immediately available

### Common scenarios and examples

- Primary actions: "Submit", "Save", "Continue"
- Secondary actions: "Cancel", "Back", "Reset"
- Destructive actions: "Delete", "Remove", "Clear All"
- Toggle actions: "Show More", "Expand/Collapse", "Play/Pause"
- Process actions: "Upload", "Download", "Export"
- Social actions: "Share", "Follow", "Like"

## Benefits

- Provides clear, actionable interactions for users to accomplish tasks
- Maintains consistency in user interface interactions across the application
- Offers visual feedback and states (hover, focus, active, disabled) to enhance usability
- Supports accessibility through keyboard navigation and screen reader compatibility
- Reduces cognitive load by making actions immediately recognizable

## Anatomy

```mermaid
flowchart TB
subgraph Button
Container[Container Element] -->|contains| Content[Content Area]
Content --> Icon[Icon <optional>]
Content --> Label[Label Text]
Content --> LoadingSpinner[Loading Spinner <optional>]

classDef container stroke:#666,stroke-width:2px
class Button container
end
```

### Component Structure

1. **Container**

- The root button element that wraps all other components
- Handles click events and keyboard interactions
- Manages focus states and accessibility attributes
- Contains variants for different button styles (default, destructive, outline, etc.)

2. **Label Text**

- The button label communicates the action that will occur
- Should be clear, concise, and action-oriented
- Must maintain proper contrast ratio with the background

3. **Icon (Optional)**

- Icons can be added to clarify an action
- Should be the same color as the text
- Placed on the left side of the label by default
- Size should be proportional to text (default 16x16px)
- Should include proper ARIA labels when used alone

4. **Loading State (Optional)**

- Visual indicator for async operations
- Replaces or overlays the button content
- Should maintain the button's original width
- Prevents multiple clicks during loading
- Typically uses a spinner or progress indicator
- Add loading text alongside spinners (e.g., "Saving..." vs just a spinner)

5. **Visual States**

- Default: Normal state
- Hover: Visual feedback on mouse over
- Focus: Keyboard navigation indicator
- Active: Pressed state
- Disabled: Indicates non-interactive state
- Loading: Shows processing state

## Best Practices

### Content

**Do's ✅**

- Use action verbs that describe what the button does (eg: "Save" instead of "Submit")
- Keep button labels concise and clear
- Be consistent with button labeling across the application
- Include loading text when appropriate ("Saving..." vs "Save")
- Use sentence case for button labels (e.g., "Save Changes")

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't use vague labels like "Click Here" or "Submit"
- Don't use inconsistent terminology
- Don't write overly long button labels
- Don't use technical jargon in button labels
- Don't mix different cases in button labels

### Accessibility

**Do's ✅**

- Use descriptive labels that clearly communicate the action [^describe-buttons]
- Provide visual feedback for all interactive states
- Ensure keyboard navigation works properly
- Include loading states for asynchronous actions
- Don't pass the `disabled` attribute to buttons, instead use `aria-disabled`. You would risk disrupting the keyboard navigation flow as this would reset focus on the button.
- Use descriptive loading states with both text and visual indicators

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't rely solely on color to communicate button states
- Don't disable browser focus indicators without providing alternatives
- Don't use button elements for navigation (use links instead)
- Don't auto-focus destructive actions
- Don't remove focus styles

### Visual Design

**Do's ✅**

- Use the same button style for the same action throughout the application
- Make buttons finger-friendly for mobile users (minimum 44x44px touch target)
- Use appropriate visual hierarchy (primary, secondary, tertiary buttons)
- Maintain consistent spacing between button groups
- Use appropriate color contrast ratios (WCAG 2.1 AA compliance)
- Include hover and focus states for interactive feedback
- Keep icon and text alignment consistent
- Maintain consistent padding and height across similar buttons
- Scale button size appropriately for different viewport sizes

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't have more than one primary action button on the screen at a time
- Don't use a [dark pattern](https://www.deceptive.design/) when you don't want users to take a certain action
- Don't mix different button styles for the same action type
- Don't use colors that conflict with your application's color scheme
- Don't make disabled buttons look interactive
- Don't use inconsistent corner radius within button groups
- Avoid having buttons looking like links or vice versa
- Don't use spinners without descriptive text

### Mobile & Touch Considerations

**Do's ✅**

- Place primary actions within thumb-friendly zones
- Use full-width buttons for important actions on mobile
- Implement haptic feedback for touch interactions
- Maintain sufficient spacing between touch targets (minimum 8px)

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't place critical actions in hard-to-reach corners
- Don't rely solely on hover states for mobile feedback
- Don't make touch targets smaller than 44x44px
- Don't crowd multiple buttons together on mobile views

### Layout & Positioning

**Do's ✅**

- Place primary action buttons in prominent, easily accessible locations
- Align buttons consistently within forms and dialogs
- Group related buttons together
- Consider mobile touch targets (minimum 44x44px)

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't position buttons where they might be accidentally clicked
- Don't hide important actions behind dropdown menus
- Don't place buttons in unexpected locations (e.g., footer)

## Code Examples

### Basic Implementation

```html
<!-- Small Button -->
<button type="button" class="button-sm">Small</button>

<!-- Default Size Button -->
<button type="button">Default</button>

<!-- Large Button -->
<button type="button" class="button-lg">Large</button>

<!-- Icon-only Button -->
<button type="button" aria-label="Settings">
  <svg aria-hidden="true">
    <use href="#icon-settings" />
  </svg>
</button>
```

### Form Submit Button

```html
<form>
  <!-- Form fields here -->
  <button type="submit" class="button button-primary" data-loading="false">
    <span class="button-text">Submit Form</span>
    <svg class="icon spinner hidden" aria-hidden="true">
      <use href="#icon-loading" />
    </svg>
  </button>
</form>
```

## Accessibility

### ARIA Attributes

**Required ARIA attributes:**

- Use `aria-label` for icon-only buttons
- Use `aria-pressed` for toggle buttons
- Use `aria-expanded` for buttons that control expandable content
- Use `aria-disabled="true"` instead of the `disabled` attribute
- Use `aria-describedby` to associate additional descriptive text

### Screen Reader Support

**Implementation example:**

```html
<!-- Icon-only button with proper ARIA -->
<button type="button" aria-label="Close dialog">
  <svg aria-hidden="true">
    <use href="#icon-close" />
  </svg>
</button>

<!-- Toggle button with ARIA pressed state -->
<button type="button" aria-pressed="false"">
  <span>Dark mode</span>
</button>

<!-- Expandable content button -->
<button type="button" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="content-1">
  <span>Show more</span>
</button>
```

### Keyboard Navigation

- Buttons must be focusable and activated with both Enter and Space keys
- Focus order should follow a logical sequence
- Focus states must be clearly visible
- Avoid removing focus outlines without providing alternatives
- Maintain focus after interactions (e.g., after closing a modal)

## Testing Guidelines

### Functional Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Show a loader when the button is submitting a form
- [ ] Disable the button during form submission to prevent double submissions
- [ ] Handle click events and trigger the appropriate action
- [ ] Maintain proper visual states (hover, focus, active, disabled)
- [ ] Support keyboard interaction (Enter and Space keys)
- [ ] Preserve button width when switching between normal and loading states
- [ ] Reset to initial state after operation completion

### Accessibility Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Be focusable and have visible focus indicators
- [ ] Have proper ARIA labels, especially for icon-only buttons
- [ ] Maintain sufficient color contrast ratios (WCAG 2.1 AA)
- [ ] Support screen reader announcements of button state changes
- [ ] Be operable with keyboard navigation
- [ ] Communicate loading states to assistive technologies
- [ ] Have appropriate touch target sizes (minimum 44x44px)

### Visual Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Maintain consistent styling across different variants (primary, secondary, destructive)
- [ ] Display icons with correct alignment and spacing
- [ ] Show proper visual feedback for all interactive states
- [ ] Render correctly across different viewport sizes
- [ ] Handle text overflow appropriately
- [ ] Display loading spinners centered within the button
- [ ] Maintain proper padding and margins in all states

### Performance Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Render without layout shifts
- [ ] Handle rapid click events appropriately
- [ ] Maintain smooth transitions between states
- [ ] Load icons and spinners efficiently
- [ ] Function without JavaScript (progressive enhancement)

### Testing Tools

- Accessibility: [WAVE](https://wave.webaim.org/), [aXe](https://www.deque.com/axe/browser-extensions/), or [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview)
- SEO: [Google's Rich Results Test](https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-data)
- Performance: [Chrome DevTools Performance panel](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/overview)
- Visual Regression: [Percy](https://percy.io/) or [Chromatic](https://www.chromatic.com/)
- Cross-browser: [BrowserStack](https://www.browserstack.com/) or [Sauce Labs](https://saucelabs.com/)

## Browser Support

<BrowserSupport features={["html.elements.button", "api.HTMLButtonElement"]} />

## Design Tokens

These design tokens follow the [Design Tokens Format](https://design-tokens.github.io/community-group/format/) specification and can be used with various token transformation tools to generate platform-specific variables.

### Button Tokens in DTF Format

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://design-tokens.org/schema.json",
  "button": {
    "sizing": {
      "height": {
        "sm": { "value": "2.25rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "2.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "2.75rem", "type": "dimension" }
      },
      "paddingX": {
        "sm": { "value": "0.75rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "2rem", "type": "dimension" }
      },
      "iconSize": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
      "iconGap": { "value": "0.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
      "touchTarget": {
        "value": "2.75rem",
        "type": "dimension",
        "description": "44px minimum touch target"
      }
    },
    "typography": {
      "fontFamily": { "value": "{font.family.sans}", "type": "fontFamily" },
      "fontWeight": { "value": "600", "type": "fontWeight" },
      "fontSize": {
        "sm": { "value": "0.875rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "1.125rem", "type": "dimension" }
      }
    },
    "border": {
      "radius": {
        "sm": { "value": "0.375rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "0.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "0.75rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "pill": { "value": "999px", "type": "dimension" }
      },
      "width": { "value": "1px", "type": "dimension" }
    },
    "variants": {
      "primary": {
        "background": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.primary.600}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.primary.700}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.primary.800}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.primary.200}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.white}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.primary.100}", "type": "color" }
        }
      },
      "secondary": {
        "background": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.100}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.gray.200}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.gray.300}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.50}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.900}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.400}", "type": "color" }
        }
      },
      "destructive": {
        "background": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.red.600}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.red.700}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.red.800}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.red.200}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.white}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.red.100}", "type": "color" }
        }
      },
      "outline": {
        "border": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.300}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.gray.400}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.gray.500}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.200}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.900}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.400}", "type": "color" }
        }
      }
    },
    "states": {
      "focusRing": {
        "width": { "value": "2px", "type": "dimension" },
        "offset": { "value": "2px", "type": "dimension" },
        "color": { "value": "{color.primary.200}", "type": "color" }
      },
      "loadingSpinner": {
        "size": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "borderWidth": { "value": "2px", "type": "dimension" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Resources

### Articles

- [button: The Button element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button)
- [I've been doing buttons wrong! Have you?](https://uxplanet.org/ive-been-doing-buttons-wrong-have-you-2117c0066613) by Adham Dannaway
- [A comprehensive guide to buttons](https://uxplanet.org/a-comprehensive-guide-to-buttons-8f3b8a1c6f0d) by UX Planet
- [A comprehensive guide to designing UX buttons](https://www.invisionapp.com/inside-design/comprehensive-guide-designing-ux-buttons/?ref=checklist.design) by InVision

- [Building Accessible Buttons with ARIA: A11y Support Series](https://www.deque.com/blog/accessible-aria-buttons/) by Deque
- [Buttons A11y Styleguide](https://a11y-style-guide.com/style-guide/section-general.html#kssref-general-buttons)

### Design systems

- [Style Dictionary](https://styledictionary.com/)
- [Button (Carbon Design System)](https://carbondesignsystem.com/components/button/usage/)
- [Button (Material Design)](https://m3.material.io/components/all-buttons)

### Libraries

[Button - Origin UI](https://originui.com/button)

### Footnotes

[^describe-buttons]: [Descriptive buttons](https://primer.style/guides/accessibility/descriptive-buttons)

Commit message:

feat: add build effort and missing drawbacks

content/en/patterns/forms/button.mdx, after:

---
description: "Trigger actions and submit forms"
icon: MousePointerClick
status: complete
---

import { BrowserSupport } from "@app/_components/browser-support";
import { BuildEffort } from "@app/_components/build-effort";

# Button

## Overview

**Buttons** are interactive elements that trigger actions or events when clicked or interacted with.

<BuildEffort
  level="low"
  description="A native HTML button with optional styling enhancements. No JavaScript required unless adding advanced behaviors."
/>

## Use Cases

### When to use:

- To trigger an immediate action or event (e.g., "Save", "Delete", "Send")
- To submit a form
- To open or close interactive elements (modals, dialogs, menus)
- To toggle between states (e.g., play/pause, show/hide)
- To download files or content
- To navigate between steps in a multi-step process

### When not to use:

- For navigation between pages (use links instead)
- When the action isn't immediately clear to users
- For text-only content that doesn't trigger an action
- When the interaction would be better served by a different component (e.g., checkbox, toggle switch)
- When multiple conflicting actions are grouped together
- When the action requires additional context that isn't immediately available

### Common scenarios and examples

- Primary actions: "Submit", "Save", "Continue"
- Secondary actions: "Cancel", "Back", "Reset"
- Destructive actions: "Delete", "Remove", "Clear All"
- Toggle actions: "Show More", "Expand/Collapse", "Play/Pause"
- Process actions: "Upload", "Download", "Export"
- Social actions: "Share", "Follow", "Like"

## Benefits

- Provides clear, actionable interactions for users to accomplish tasks
- Maintains consistency in user interface interactions across the application
- Offers visual feedback and states (hover, focus, active, disabled) to enhance usability
- Supports accessibility through keyboard navigation and screen reader compatibility
- Reduces cognitive load by making actions immediately recognizable

## Drawbacks

- **Overuse can lead to UI clutter** – Too many buttons in an interface can confuse users.
- **Styling inconsistencies** – Needs proper theming and responsive considerations for different screen sizes.
- **Click area issues** – If not sized properly, buttons may be difficult to tap on mobile.
- **Lack of clear labels** – Buttons without descriptive text (e.g., just an icon) can cause usability problems.
- **Focus management** – Requires proper `:focus` states for accessibility and keyboard users.

## Anatomy

```mermaid
flowchart TB
subgraph Button
Container[Container Element] -->|contains| Content[Content Area]
Content --> Icon[Icon <optional>]
Content --> Label[Label Text]
Content --> LoadingSpinner[Loading Spinner <optional>]

classDef container stroke:#666,stroke-width:2px
class Button container
end
```

### Component Structure

1. **Container**

- The root button element that wraps all other components
- Handles click events and keyboard interactions
- Manages focus states and accessibility attributes
- Contains variants for different button styles (default, destructive, outline, etc.)

2. **Label Text**

- The button label communicates the action that will occur
- Should be clear, concise, and action-oriented
- Must maintain proper contrast ratio with the background

3. **Icon (Optional)**

- Icons can be added to clarify an action
- Should be the same color as the text
- Placed on the left side of the label by default
- Size should be proportional to text (default 16x16px)
- Should include proper ARIA labels when used alone

4. **Loading State (Optional)**

- Visual indicator for async operations
- Replaces or overlays the button content
- Should maintain the button's original width
- Prevents multiple clicks during loading
- Typically uses a spinner or progress indicator
- Add loading text alongside spinners (e.g., "Saving..." vs just a spinner)

5. **Visual States**

- Default: Normal state
- Hover: Visual feedback on mouse over
- Focus: Keyboard navigation indicator
- Active: Pressed state
- Disabled: Indicates non-interactive state
- Loading: Shows processing state

## Best Practices

### Content

**Do's ✅**

- Use action verbs that describe what the button does (eg: "Save" instead of "Submit")
- Keep button labels concise and clear
- Be consistent with button labeling across the application
- Include loading text when appropriate ("Saving..." vs "Save")
- Use sentence case for button labels (e.g., "Save Changes")

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't use vague labels like "Click Here" or "Submit"
- Don't use inconsistent terminology
- Don't write overly long button labels
- Don't use technical jargon in button labels
- Don't mix different cases in button labels

### Accessibility

**Do's ✅**

- Use descriptive labels that clearly communicate the action [^describe-buttons]
- Provide visual feedback for all interactive states
- Ensure keyboard navigation works properly
- Include loading states for asynchronous actions
- Don't pass the `disabled` attribute to buttons, instead use `aria-disabled`. You would risk disrupting the keyboard navigation flow as this would reset focus on the button.
- Use descriptive loading states with both text and visual indicators

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't rely solely on color to communicate button states
- Don't disable browser focus indicators without providing alternatives
- Don't use button elements for navigation (use links instead)
- Don't auto-focus destructive actions
- Don't remove focus styles

### Visual Design

**Do's ✅**

- Use the same button style for the same action throughout the application
- Make buttons finger-friendly for mobile users (minimum 44x44px touch target)
- Use appropriate visual hierarchy (primary, secondary, tertiary buttons)
- Maintain consistent spacing between button groups
- Use appropriate color contrast ratios (WCAG 2.1 AA compliance)
- Include hover and focus states for interactive feedback
- Keep icon and text alignment consistent
- Maintain consistent padding and height across similar buttons
- Scale button size appropriately for different viewport sizes

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't have more than one primary action button on the screen at a time
- Don't use a [dark pattern](https://www.deceptive.design/) when you don't want users to take a certain action
- Don't mix different button styles for the same action type
- Don't use colors that conflict with your application's color scheme
- Don't make disabled buttons look interactive
- Don't use inconsistent corner radius within button groups
- Avoid having buttons looking like links or vice versa
- Don't use spinners without descriptive text

### Mobile & Touch Considerations

**Do's ✅**

- Place primary actions within thumb-friendly zones
- Use full-width buttons for important actions on mobile
- Implement haptic feedback for touch interactions
- Maintain sufficient spacing between touch targets (minimum 8px)

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't place critical actions in hard-to-reach corners
- Don't rely solely on hover states for mobile feedback
- Don't make touch targets smaller than 44x44px
- Don't crowd multiple buttons together on mobile views

### Layout & Positioning

**Do's ✅**

- Place primary action buttons in prominent, easily accessible locations
- Align buttons consistently within forms and dialogs
- Group related buttons together
- Consider mobile touch targets (minimum 44x44px)

**Don'ts ❌**

- Don't position buttons where they might be accidentally clicked
- Don't hide important actions behind dropdown menus
- Don't place buttons in unexpected locations (e.g., footer)

## Code Examples

### Basic Implementation

```html
<!-- Small Button -->
<button type="button" class="button-sm">Small</button>

<!-- Default Size Button -->
<button type="button">Default</button>

<!-- Large Button -->
<button type="button" class="button-lg">Large</button>

<!-- Icon-only Button -->
<button type="button" aria-label="Settings">
  <svg aria-hidden="true">
    <use href="#icon-settings" />
  </svg>
</button>
```

### Form Submit Button

```html
<form>
  <!-- Form fields here -->
  <button type="submit" class="button button-primary" data-loading="false">
    <span class="button-text">Submit Form</span>
    <svg class="icon spinner hidden" aria-hidden="true">
      <use href="#icon-loading" />
    </svg>
  </button>
</form>
```

## Accessibility

### ARIA Attributes

**Required ARIA attributes:**

- Use `aria-label` for icon-only buttons
- Use `aria-pressed` for toggle buttons
- Use `aria-expanded` for buttons that control expandable content
- Use `aria-disabled="true"` instead of the `disabled` attribute
- Use `aria-describedby` to associate additional descriptive text

### Screen Reader Support

**Implementation example:**

```html
<!-- Icon-only button with proper ARIA -->
<button type="button" aria-label="Close dialog">
  <svg aria-hidden="true">
    <use href="#icon-close" />
  </svg>
</button>

<!-- Toggle button with ARIA pressed state -->
<button type="button" aria-pressed="false"">
  <span>Dark mode</span>
</button>

<!-- Expandable content button -->
<button type="button" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="content-1">
  <span>Show more</span>
</button>
```

### Keyboard Navigation

- Buttons must be focusable and activated with both Enter and Space keys
- Focus order should follow a logical sequence
- Focus states must be clearly visible
- Avoid removing focus outlines without providing alternatives
- Maintain focus after interactions (e.g., after closing a modal)

## Testing Guidelines

### Functional Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Show a loader when the button is submitting a form
- [ ] Disable the button during form submission to prevent double submissions
- [ ] Handle click events and trigger the appropriate action
- [ ] Maintain proper visual states (hover, focus, active, disabled)
- [ ] Support keyboard interaction (Enter and Space keys)
- [ ] Preserve button width when switching between normal and loading states
- [ ] Reset to initial state after operation completion

### Accessibility Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Be focusable and have visible focus indicators
- [ ] Have proper ARIA labels, especially for icon-only buttons
- [ ] Maintain sufficient color contrast ratios (WCAG 2.1 AA)
- [ ] Support screen reader announcements of button state changes
- [ ] Be operable with keyboard navigation
- [ ] Communicate loading states to assistive technologies
- [ ] Have appropriate touch target sizes (minimum 44x44px)

### Visual Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Maintain consistent styling across different variants (primary, secondary, destructive)
- [ ] Display icons with correct alignment and spacing
- [ ] Show proper visual feedback for all interactive states
- [ ] Render correctly across different viewport sizes
- [ ] Handle text overflow appropriately
- [ ] Display loading spinners centered within the button
- [ ] Maintain proper padding and margins in all states

### Performance Testing

**Should ✓**

- [ ] Render without layout shifts
- [ ] Handle rapid click events appropriately
- [ ] Maintain smooth transitions between states
- [ ] Load icons and spinners efficiently
- [ ] Function without JavaScript (progressive enhancement)

### Testing Tools

- Accessibility: [WAVE](https://wave.webaim.org/), [aXe](https://www.deque.com/axe/browser-extensions/), or [Lighthouse](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview)
- SEO: [Google's Rich Results Test](https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-data)
- Performance: [Chrome DevTools Performance panel](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/overview)
- Visual Regression: [Percy](https://percy.io/) or [Chromatic](https://www.chromatic.com/)
- Cross-browser: [BrowserStack](https://www.browserstack.com/) or [Sauce Labs](https://saucelabs.com/)

## Browser Support

<BrowserSupport features={["html.elements.button", "api.HTMLButtonElement"]} />

## Design Tokens

These design tokens follow the [Design Tokens Format](https://design-tokens.github.io/community-group/format/) specification and can be used with various token transformation tools to generate platform-specific variables.

### Button Tokens in DTF Format

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://design-tokens.org/schema.json",
  "button": {
    "sizing": {
      "height": {
        "sm": { "value": "2.25rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "2.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "2.75rem", "type": "dimension" }
      },
      "paddingX": {
        "sm": { "value": "0.75rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "2rem", "type": "dimension" }
      },
      "iconSize": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
      "iconGap": { "value": "0.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
      "touchTarget": {
        "value": "2.75rem",
        "type": "dimension",
        "description": "44px minimum touch target"
      }
    },
    "typography": {
      "fontFamily": { "value": "{font.family.sans}", "type": "fontFamily" },
      "fontWeight": { "value": "600", "type": "fontWeight" },
      "fontSize": {
        "sm": { "value": "0.875rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "1.125rem", "type": "dimension" }
      }
    },
    "border": {
      "radius": {
        "sm": { "value": "0.375rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "md": { "value": "0.5rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "lg": { "value": "0.75rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "pill": { "value": "999px", "type": "dimension" }
      },
      "width": { "value": "1px", "type": "dimension" }
    },
    "variants": {
      "primary": {
        "background": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.primary.600}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.primary.700}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.primary.800}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.primary.200}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.white}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.primary.100}", "type": "color" }
        }
      },
      "secondary": {
        "background": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.100}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.gray.200}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.gray.300}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.50}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.900}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.400}", "type": "color" }
        }
      },
      "destructive": {
        "background": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.red.600}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.red.700}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.red.800}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.red.200}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.white}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.red.100}", "type": "color" }
        }
      },
      "outline": {
        "border": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.300}", "type": "color" },
          "hover": { "value": "{color.gray.400}", "type": "color" },
          "active": { "value": "{color.gray.500}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.200}", "type": "color" }
        },
        "text": {
          "default": { "value": "{color.gray.900}", "type": "color" },
          "disabled": { "value": "{color.gray.400}", "type": "color" }
        }
      }
    },
    "states": {
      "focusRing": {
        "width": { "value": "2px", "type": "dimension" },
        "offset": { "value": "2px", "type": "dimension" },
        "color": { "value": "{color.primary.200}", "type": "color" }
      },
      "loadingSpinner": {
        "size": { "value": "1rem", "type": "dimension" },
        "borderWidth": { "value": "2px", "type": "dimension" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Resources

### Articles

- [button: The Button element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button)
- [I've been doing buttons wrong! Have you?](https://uxplanet.org/ive-been-doing-buttons-wrong-have-you-2117c0066613) by Adham Dannaway
- [A comprehensive guide to buttons](https://uxplanet.org/a-comprehensive-guide-to-buttons-8f3b8a1c6f0d) by UX Planet
- [A comprehensive guide to designing UX buttons](https://www.invisionapp.com/inside-design/comprehensive-guide-designing-ux-buttons/?ref=checklist.design) by InVision

- [Building Accessible Buttons with ARIA: A11y Support Series](https://www.deque.com/blog/accessible-aria-buttons/) by Deque
- [Buttons A11y Styleguide](https://a11y-style-guide.com/style-guide/section-general.html#kssref-general-buttons)

### Design systems

- [Style Dictionary](https://styledictionary.com/)
- [Button (Carbon Design System)](https://carbondesignsystem.com/components/button/usage/)
- [Button (Material Design)](https://m3.material.io/components/all-buttons)

### Libraries

[Button - Origin UI](https://originui.com/button)

### Footnotes

[^describe-buttons]: [Descriptive buttons](https://primer.style/guides/accessibility/descriptive-buttons)
